
-- SOMTEHING IS MISSING--
 IN FILE: nime_archive/web/2005/nime2005_160.pdf 

--COULD NOT EXTRACT KEYWORDS--
HERE IS THE TEXT: 
 
Sustainable: a dynamic, robotic, sound installation 
David Birchfield 

Arts, Media and Engineering 
Arizona State University 

Tempe, AZ 85287 
1.480.965-3155 

dbirchfield@asu.edu 

David Lorig 
Arts, Media and Engineering 

Arizona State University 
Tempe, AZ 85287 
1.480.965-3155 

david.lorig@asu.edu 

Kelly Phillips 
Arts, Media and Engineering 

Arizona State University 
Tempe, AZ 85287 
1.480.965-3155 

crowbar@asu.edu 
 
 

ABSTRACT 
This paper details the motivations, design, and realization of 
Sustainable, a dynamic, robotic sound installation that employs a 
generative algorithm for music and sound creation.  The piece is 
comprised of seven autonomous water gong nodes that are 
networked together by water tubes to distribute water throughout 
the system.  A water resource allocation algorithm guides this 
distribution process and produces an ever-evolving sonic and 
visual texture.  A simple set of behaviors govern the individual 
gongs, and the system as a whole exhibits emergent properties 
that yield local and large scale forms in sound and light. 

Keywords 
Music, Sound, Robotics, Generative Arts, Evolutionary 
Computing, Dynamic Systems, Sculpture, Installation Art. 

1. INTRODUCTION 
Sustainable, is a dynamic, autonomous, robotic installation that is 
comprised of a network of seven independent water gongs (see 
Fig. 1).  The network models a water resource allocation 
algorithm that yields a perpetual evolution of the sonic, visual, 
and timbral aspects of the installation.  Each gong node functions 
independently and autonomously, but through their simple 
interactions, the system as a whole exhibits dynamic, emergent 
behaviors that unfold over time. 
 

A water gong is a musical gong that is dipped into a tank of water.  
As the gong is partially submersed, the water alters the resonant 
properties of the metal such that the sounding frequency of the 
gong descends as it is immersed below the water’s surface.  This 
instrumental effect is employed by composers of contemporary 
music, as it’s shifting glissandi and timbres produces an intriguing 
and distinct sound.   

 
Fig. 1. Portion of the gong network 

We have built a collection of robotic water gongs, each with two 
solenoid beaters that strike a gong that is fixed above a water tank.  
Rather than raising and lowering the gong itself, we raise and 
lower the water level in the tank with water pumps to produce the 
desired effect.  Lamps positioned below the transparent tanks 
illuminate patterns on the surface of the water as it ripples and 
splashes.  Each gong has one upstream and one downstream 
neighbor, and the gongs are networked together with water tubes.  
Thus, water is distributed throughout the system, and as the gongs 
resonate above the ever shifting water levels, chords and rhythms 
emerge that reflect the state of the population.  A water resource 
sharing algorithm governs the global behavior of the system, and 
each water gong node is modeled as a water consumer with 
individual needs and behaviors. 
 
This paper describes the goals and outcomes of the design and 
realization of this work. In Section 2 we outline the important 
themes and concepts that inform the aesthetic aspects of the work.  
Section 3 discusses the generative algorithm that governs the 
system.  In Section 4 we describe the construction and behaviors 
of the individual gongs.  Finally we discuss the results of this 
work, and outline directions for future work. 

2. KEY THEMES AND CONCEPTS 
A number of themes and concepts inform the design and 
realization of this installation.  These concepts are reflected in the 
sonic and visual materials that comprise the piece, and in the 
technologies and algorithms that influence its behavior. 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
Nime’05, May 26-28, , 2005, Vancouver, BC, Canada. 
Copyright remains with the author(s). 

Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada

160



 
Water is an important force and metaphor.  As residents of the 
western United States, where water rights and access are critically 
important, we are driven to address this issue in our work.  The 
implementation of a real world water resource-sharing algorithm 
reflects this influence.  In addition, the network of water gongs 
share a limited resource of water, and its perpetual re-allocation 
between the members of the system models the shifts of natural, 
cultural, and intellectual resources throughout the networks of our 
local and global communities.  The installation is intended to 
highlight the interconnected nature of our social and physical 
environments.  Finally, water serves as the means of 
communication between nodes in the network.  This anachronistic 
mechanism references the use of waterways as the traditional 
vehicle for communication and transportation. 
 

We explore the relationship between organic materials and 
technology in robotics, and seek to balance these forces in the 
piece.  An important design principle for the work is that the 
technology should be downplayed rather than fetish-ized. This 
concept informs the decision to have the sound and sonic events 
originate from 'natural' (e.g., striking the physical gongs) and not 
electronic sources. Similarly, the technology is present in the 
background of the piece, thus allowing the audience to focus on 
the organic aspects of the work.  The use of organic materials as 
core components of the evolutionary algorithm also introduces 
desirable irregularities that often yield interesting and compelling 
results as in biological evolutionary systems. 
 
The evolution of sonic and visual materials addresses the passage 
of time on multiple levels.  Through the influence of the 
evolutionary model, shifts in texture and sound unfold at a gradual 
rate.  At the local level, viewers of the piece can experience 
transitions by focusing their attention on the actions of individual 
water gongs.  At the global level, viewers can appreciate the more 
gradual sonic and visual transitions of the system as activity and 
textures will shift around the network, and diverse composite 
sonorities will emerge.  In addition, the generative algorithm 
produces alternating modes of stability and instability that yield 
large-scale meta-pulses in the resulting sound. 

3. DYNAMIC SYSTEM BEHAVIOR 
Sustainable is influenced by related works in both music and the 
visual arts that utilize models of natural dynamic systems to guide 
artistic work [11-14].  In our own recent work [1, 2] we have 
utilized evolutionary computing techniques [5] to evolve virtual 
populations of intelligent musical structures. Through the 
implementation of software agents that exhibit local intelligence, 
and are governed by a simple set of behaviors, we have 
automatically generated music that is structurally rich, and 
exhibits emergent properties.  We have had success with these 
previous models, but while such systems are feasible in the realm 
of software, their implementation is logistically impractical in 
hardware.   
 
As a consequence, we have looked to other generative 
mechanisms that will exhibit these same dynamic behaviors in 
this piece.  Inspired by water, we have modeled the distribution of 
resources according to a real world water resource allocation 
algorithm.  Kelman [7] proposes a number of sophisticated 
mechanisms for market driven allocation algorithms.  However, 

given the limited size of our network, and our desire to clearly 
simulate this real world system, we chose to implement a simple, 
yet practical model.  In Sustainable, each water consumer acts 
selfishly and independently.  In accord with the principles 
outlined below, there is no policing agent, and those ‘upstream’ in 
this closed system have priority to use the quantity of water they 
desire. 
 
In our implementation of this allocation algorithm, we have 
sought to preserve the key principles of more complex 
evolutionary systems, and have implemented them in such a way 
that the network will exhibit emergent and dynamic behavior, 
while remaining practical and robust.  These principles are as 
follows: 
 
Each node of the network acts in an autonomous, selfish manner.  
As will be described in Section 4, a simple set of deterministic 
rules govern the behavior of the gong beating and illumination 
state.  These are dictated by the relationship of the current water 
level to the gong’s target water level.  Each gong acts selfishly, 
and independently, either purging or conserving water to achieve 
its target. 
 
Players in the system require only rudimentary, local interactions.  
In this network, the water gongs are linked to their two adjacent 
neighbors via input and output water tubes.  There is no central 
processing or sophisticated interaction between the gongs.  
 
There must be critical mass to achieve dynamic and emergent 
behavior.  As described above, there are practical limitations 
when implementing a multi-node networked system in hardware.  
We have implemented a network of seven gongs, and practical 
experience has shown that this is a sufficient number that allows 
the system to explore a wide variety of textures in both the sonic 
and visual domains.  These outcomes are compelling, and given of 
the number of variables and irregularities that are built into the 
network, they cannot be predicted.  During the development 
stages of the work, testing with only three nodes proved to be 
insufficient number.  Though multiple states could be achieved, 
transitions were abrupt and predictable.  Certainly, increasing the 
network beyond seven nodes would produce even more varied 
outcomes, and we hope to expand the size of the piece in our 
future work. 
 

Periods of both relative stability and instability are desirable.  In 
time-based media such as music, tension can be created through 
the introduction of distortions to normative, stable structures [3, 
9].  In evolutionary systems, periods of stability often alternate 
with periods of transition and instability [4, 10].  Our 
implementation of the water resource-sharing algorithm exhibits 
this same property, and allows for the realization of large-scale 
forms that unfold over time.  The system will often become fixed 
in a given state, as the interconnected nodes will be incapable of 
changing states.  However, because the consumer’s water 
demands will periodically change over time, the system will lurch 
out of one state and sustain a period of transition before arriving at 
a new period of stability.  This feature of the algorithm produces a 
meta pulsing that is satisfying musically, aesthetically, and 
conceptually. 

 

Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada

161



4. REALIZATION 
Sustainable, is comprised of seven autonomous water gong nodes 
that are networked via water tubes and modeled after real world 
water consumers.  This section describes the features of the gongs 
and details their individual behaviors. 
 

4.1  Physical Construction 
The individual nodes share the same basic design and behaviors, 
including the following components: 
 

 

Fig. 1. Individual water gong node 

• A gong or tam-tam suspended over a tank of water 
• An eight element float-switch mechanism to sense the current 

water level in the tank 
• Two solenoid beaters that strike the gong 
• A submersible water pump whose output is linked to one 

downstream neighbor (all pump at the same rate) 
• An input water tube from one upstream neighbor 
• A light under the water tank that illuminates the water surface 

and gong 
• Microprocessor (Atmel Mega16) and custom designed printed 

circuit board with circuitry for sensing and control 
 
Each component has been custom designed and fabricated by the 
authors, and the nodes are intended to be physically functional as 
musical instruments, and visually compelling. 
 
Although, the basic functions of the nodes are identical, some 
details are unique to the individual water gongs.  For example, 
each gong is a different size and type.  We have used 9” and 13” 
nipple gongs; 12”, 20”, and 24” tam-tams; and 14” and 18” wind 
gongs.  The tank sizes, float switches, and mounting hardware 
have been custom fit to suit these dimensions.  In addition, the 
beater striking surfaces of each gong is unique in order to elicit 
different timbres from each node.  These variations provide 
critical variety and clarity to the choir of gongs and allow for a 
broad range of possible timbres, frequencies, and composite 
sonorities. 
 

4.2 Individual Gong Behaviors 
Each of the gongs behave according to a set of simple, 
deterministic rules that include sensing of their current water 

level, setting a target water level, purging or conserving water, 
striking the gong, and illuminating the lamp.  These behaviors 
model the actions of consumers in a water-sharing network such 
as farmers or golf courses along a shared river.  Each node has a 
cycle that is iterated perpetually, and control of these sensing and 
actuation tasks is implemented on the microcontroller circuit 
embedded within each water gong.  There are five steps to each 
cycle: (1) sense the current water level, (2) update the water pump 
state, (3) update the striking mode,  (4) update the lamp state, and 
(5) if appropriate update the target water level (i.e., water need). 
4.2.1 Sensing Current Water Level 
At the beginning of each cycle, the gong will read the state of the 
eight-level float switch mechanism to determine the current water 
level in its tank.  This current water level will be subtracted from 
the desired water level to determine whether its need is over, 
under, or exactly met.  Just as farmers along a river desire to have 
their water consumption equal to their target water need, if the 
current and target levels are not equal, the gong will act 
accordingly. 
4.2.2 Update Water Pump State 
If the current water level in a gong’s tank exceeds its need, it will 
turn its water pump on to purge water. If the current level is below 
its desired level, it will shutdown its pump in order to conserve 
water. However, given that the gongs are connected only through 
their pumps, the water level in a given tank is dependent on the 
behavior of its upstream neighbor.  For example, if node n turns 
its pump on in an effort to reduce its current volume, if upstream 
node n-1, is simultaneously purging, because of the matched 
pump rates in the network, water will simply flow through node n 
with no change in its level.  Similarly, if node n turns its pump off 
in hopes of raising its water level, it relies on overflow water from 
node n-1 for the level to change. 
4.2.3 Update Gong Striking Mode 
There are four modes of gong striking: (1) silence, (2) sporadic 
single strikes, (3) alternating strikes at a constant rate, and (4) 
alternating strikes with an accelerating/decelerating rate.  The 
gong striking mode reflects the distance of the current water level 
to the target level.  As the current level approaches the target 
water level, the striking mode will transition from state 1 – 4.  
Thus, when the gong water level has met its target, it will be most 
vigorously active, and it will be silent when it is distant from its 
target. 
4.2.4 Update the Illumination State 
Inspired by the work of Hiroshi Ishii [6], we have implemented a 
visual complement to the changing sonic aspect of the installation.  
In relation to the distance of the gong’s water level from its target 
level, a spotlight lamp below the water tank is switched either on 
or off.  If the target level is attained, the lamp is turned off, and 
otherwise the lamp is illuminated. This lamp illuminates ripples 
on the surface of the water that change according to the 
characteristics of the gong, the rate of beating, and the quantity of 
water in the tank. In a darkened exhibition space, these water 
patterns are project onto the ceiling by the lamp, yielding a soft, 
ambient display of activity in the network. 
4.2.5 Update the Target Water Level 
Just as real world water demands will shift with changing seasons 
and years, each gong node will periodically update its target water 
level.  After a fixed set of cycles (approximately 150), the gong 
node will update its target level to a new random number from 
one to seven.  Each node shares the same random sequence, but 

Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada

162



through irregularities in the water networking, and depending on 
initial conditions in the system, these updates will quickly phase 
apart to the extent that new water demands cannot be anticipated. 

5. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
We have described the concepts that underlie Sustainable, 
articulated the principles that govern its evolution, detailed of the 
realization of the system, and discussed the behavior of individual 
water gongs.  The work was first shown in September of 2004.  It 
was well received by viewers then, and has been successfully 
shown in several exhibitions since that time.  Despite the 
challenges posed by the realization of a compelling and dynamic, 
robotic sound installation, we have been pleased with the 
achievement of our goals, and encouraged by the outcomes of the 
system. 
 
In our future work, we intend to refine aspects of the model that 
will lead to an even greater diversity of sonic and visual textures.  
Firstly, we intend to explore more sophisticated resource 
allocation models.  We will potentially borrow concepts of cost 
and expense from economic theory to enrich the behaviors of the 
modeled consumers.  Secondly, we plan to implement a sense of 
history for each gong node.  Such a history that includes details of 
how often target water levels are met, and which behaviors have 
been expressed could open new possibilities for sonic and visual 
forms to emerge over time.  Finally, we hope to construct more 
water gongs to expand the installation beyond the existing seven 
nodes. 

6. MEDIA DOCUMENTATION 
Extensive documentation of the design, development and final 
realization of the piece can be found online at 
http://ame2.asu.edu/faculty/dab/sustainable.php. Still images, 
video clips, and diagrams are published that detail each stage of 
the design process and outcomes. 
 

7. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
We are grateful for generous support and encouragement from the 
Arts, Media and Engineering program that has made this work 
possible.  We are also grateful for invaluable enthusiasm, advice 
and guidance from Assegid Kidané. 
 

8. REFERENCES 
[1] Birchfield, D.  Genetic Algorithm for the Evolution of 

Feature Trajectories in Time-Dependent Arts. Proceedings 
6th International Conference on Generative Art. Milan, Italy, 
2003. 

[2] Birchfield, D. Generative Model for the Creation of Musical 
Emotion, Meaning, and Form, ACM SIGMM 2003 
Workshop on Experiential Telepresence, Berkeley, CA, 
2003. 

[3] Cope, D.: Virtual Music: Computer Synthesis of Musical 
Style.  The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 2001. 

[4] Holland, J.: Adaptation in Natural and Artificial Systems, 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 1975. 

[5] Husbands, P.: Distributed Coevolutionary Genetic 
Algorithms for Multi-Criteria and Multi Constraint 
Optimisation. Evolutionary Computing, AISB Workshop 
150-165, 1994. 

[6] Ishii, H. and Ullmer, B. Tangible bits: towards seamless 
interfaces between people, bits and atoms. Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems, 
ACM Press: 234—241, 1997. 

[7] Kelman, J. and Kelman, R. Water Allocation for Economic 
Production in a Semi-arid Region. Water Resources 
Development, Vol. 18, Issue 3, pgs 391-407, 2002. 

[8] Lerdahl, F. and Jackendoff, R. A Generative Theory of Tonal 
Music, Cambridge, MA, MIT Press, 1983. 

[9] Meyer, L.B. Emotion and Meaning in Music. The University 
of Chicago Press, London, 1956. 

[10] Mitchell, M. An Introduction to Genetic Algorithms. MIT 
Press, 1996. 

[11] Nelson, G.L., Fractal Mountains.  Computer Music Currents, 
vol. 10, 1992. 

[12] Repetto, D. Crash and Bloom. 
http://music.columbia.edu/~douglas/portfolio/crash_and_blo
om, 2002. 

[13] Sims, K.  Genetic Images. 
http://www.genarts.com/karl/genetic-images.html, 1993 

[14] Sims, K. Computer Graphics, 25(4), pp. 319-328, 1991. 
 
 

 

Proceedings of the 2005 International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME05), Vancouver, BC, Canada

163


 

 -+-+-+-+-+-+-+- 
  
This paper details the motivations, design, and realization of 
Sustainable, a dynamic, robotic sound installation that employs a 
generative algorithm for music and sound creation.  The piece is 
comprised of seven autonomous water gong nodes that are 
networked together by water tubes to distribute water throughout 
the system.  A water resource allocation algorithm guides this 
distribution process and produces an ever-evolving sonic and 
visual texture.  A simple set of behaviors govern the individual 
gongs, and the system as a whole exhibits emergent properties 
that yield local and large scale forms in sound and light. 

 

  
 END OF nime_archive/web/2005/nime2005_160.pdf


